# What the Query? - A brief look at [React Query](https://tanstack.com/query/v4/docs/adapters/react-query)

Welcome back to episode 2 of Rocking the Boat, where I ask the question "can we?" so that it's easier to spend more time later asking, "should we?". This week, React Query is up! 🥳

## Episode TL;DR

- Excellent candidate for a drop-in for Redux
- There are two types of state management in React apps
  - client/application state
  - server state
- We teach Redux as a tool to do both (redux-zoo is an example of client state management, sweet-as-organics-api is more geared towards server state management)
- Server state management is commonly the problem that gets hard that people use Redux to solve
- But that takes a lot of boilerplate code to do!
- React Query is a library that does server state management really well, with much less code
- Redux week is hard, React Query could make it easier?

## Episode TL;GC (Too Long; Gimme Code)

Here's an [example solution for `sweet-as-organics-api`](https://github.com/dev-academy-challenges/challenges/tree/what-the-query/packages/sweet-as-organics-api)

<details><summary>To run:</summary>

```sh
# get to the branch 'what-the-query' of dev-academy-challenges/challenges

# cd to packages/sweet-as-organics-api
# git checkout what-the-query

npm install
npm run knex migrate:latest
npm run knex seed:run
npm run dev
```
</details>

## Why now?

I've been giving my best shot at an Accessibility Audit (they're super worthwhile and I'm learning loads!). I decided to pick [sweet-as-organics-api](https://github.com/dev-academy-challenges/challenges/tree/main/packages/sweet-as-organics-api) because I've helped students out with it but haven't tried it myself. It's an awesome challenge and really well presented!

I was neck deep in reducers and actions when I realised, Redux is hard.

So, I wanted to look at the same thing built with React Query, a server-state management solution.

## What is State Management?

I think there are two types of State Management that we run into or have a need for:

- **Client/Application State** (_stuff that lives on the client that we want to render on the client_):
  - Which page am I on?
  - What colour scheme am I using? (light/dark/custom)
  - What are the items in my local shopping cart?

- **Server State** (_stuff that lives on the server that we want to render on the client_):
  - What are my orders and what are their statuses? How do I update them?
  - Who are my friends? Which ones are online?
  - Who are the Wombles? What rubbish are they picking up? What traits do they have?
  - ... Anything that persists in a database or _somewhere else_

So, how does Redux fare against these two variations of state management?

## Client State

Redux is built around solving this problem, and it becomes clear when looking at the core patterns Redux uses.

It introduced the Flux pattern (action -> dispatcher -> store -> view) with a global store where components can subscribe to certain parts of state and dispatch actions to update certain parts of state. Using the `react-redux` bindings, we can use hooks to handle the subscriptions and dispatchings (it's a word maybe...?) with `useDispatch` and `useSelector`.

## Server State

To manage server state, we use Thunks, we dispatch async actions and manually update the store based on the response from the server. And there are generally two approaches I see students come up with.

<details>
<summary>The "update everything myself"</summary>

```js
function addTodo(newTodo) {
  return (dispatch) => {
    dispatch(addTodoPending()) // controls some sort of loading state
    return postTodo(newTodo) // api function, postTodo returns the newly added todo, with id, createdAt and whatnot
      .then((addedTodo) => {
        dispatch(addTodoSuccess(addedTodo)) // adds the todo to the redux store
      })
      .catch(() => {
        dispatch(addTodoFailure()) // controls some sort of error state
      })
  }
}
```
</details>

<details>
<summary>The "eh, just refetch it"</summary>

```js
// an example fetching function
function fetchTodos() {
  return (dispatch) => {
    dispatch(fetchTodosPending())
    return getTodos() // api function, returns all todos
      .then((todos) => {
        dispatch(fetchTodosSuccess(todos))
      })
      .catch((err) => {
        dispatch(fetchTodosFailure())
      })
  }
}

function addTodo(newTodo) {
  return (dispatch) => {
    dispatch(addTodoPending()) // controls some sort of loading state
    return postTodo(newTodo) // api function, returns status 201
      .then(() => {
        dispatch(fetchTodos()) // get all the todos from the database again
      })
      .catch((err) => {
        dispatch(addTodoFailure(err)) // controls some sort of error state
      })
  }
}
```
</details>

In both examples, we are entirely responsible for the error and loading states, which are probably a feature we want for every async action (because feedback for the user is good)

In the first example, when we successfully add the todo, we manually _also_ add it to the Redux state. With this approach, there's only one network call to the server, however, we need to define the logic for how to update the state (in Redux) and make sure that our data is still in sync with the server. We essentially have _two_ sources of truth for our data.

In the second example, when we successfully add the todo to the database, we call `fetchTodos` again. This is making a second network call, however, we're guaranteed to have the most-up-to-date data from the database. With this approach, our database is our _single_ source of truth for our data.

I think the second is the more common (and less error prone) pattern

The pattern tends to be:

fetch initial stuff from db -> change stuff in db (create, update, delete) -> refetch stuff from db

## React Query

Before we start, React Query uses some terms for data:

- **Queries** refer to getting or fetching data (GET)
- **Mutations** refer to adding, changing, or mutating data (PUT, PATCH, DELETE, POST)

React Query provides us with hooks to manage this pattern incredibly well, with added extras if needed as data fetching complexity grows.

On the surface it lets us:

- fetch data and then access it globally in our React components
- mutate data on the server and automatically refetch any parts of the UI need refetching

I'm going to cover a small surface area of React Query to fill the same size boots left by Redux.

Let's pretend we are making a todo app where the todo schema is something like:

```ts
{
  id: number;
  title: string;
  completed: boolean;
}
```

And some `apiClient.js` functions like:

```js
// for react query, we use an object for the input params
// I think this has to do with object params being more helpful with type inference in TypeScript?
// or it might be so that there's only one param with named fields

function getTodos() {
  // return an array of todo objects or error status
}

function getTodoById({ id }) {
  // return a todo object or error status
}

function patchTodoStatus({ id, completed }) {
  // return 200 or error status
}

function postTodo({ newTodo }) {
  // return 201 or error status
}

function deleteTodo({ id }) {
  // return 200 or error status
}
```

### First up: Boilerplate

In our `client/index.js` file we need to initialize some things to set up React Query.

```js
// ... import other stuff
import { QueryClient, QueryClientProvider } from 'react-query'

const queryClient = new QueryClient()

ReactDOM.render(
  // <OtherProviders>
    <QueryClientProvider client={queryClient}>
      <App />
    </QueryClientProvider>,
  // <OtherProviders>,
  document.getElementById('app'))
```

### 1. Fetch initial stuff from db

```js
// some todos component
function Todos() {
  // data is the array of todos
  // isLoading is a boolean
  // error is an error
  const { data, isLoading, error } = useQuery(['todos'], getTodos)

  return (
    data.map((todo) => {
      return <div>{todo.title}</div>
    })
  )
}
```

`useQuery` has two things here:

1. A Query Key, which is a unique key that we give queries, this will be important soon
2. A Query Function, for our apps, we can just pass our `apiClient.js` functions

This is all the code we need to get todos on the page, no reducer, no action creators, no thunky action creators, no store

<details><summary>Extra notes:</summary>

To use the todo data in other places, we would call

```js
const { data, ...otherStuff } = useQuery(['todos'], getTodos)
```

in other components.

This can be abstracted to its own hook if its used a lot:

```js
const useTodos = () => {
  return useQuery(['todos'], getTodos)
}

const { data, ...otherStuff } = useTodos()
```
</details>

### change stuff in db (create)

```js
function AddTodo() {
  // some state to store the new todo
  const [newTodo, setNewTodo] = useState('')

  // react query stuff
  const queryClient = useQueryClient()
  const mutation = useMutation(postTodo, {
    onSuccess: () => {
      queryClient.invalidateQueries(['todos'])
    }
  })

  function handleSubmit(e) {
    e.preventDefault()

    mutation.mutate({ newTodo })
  }

  return (
    // ... render form to add new todo
  )
}
```

**Q:** What's `useQueryClient`?
**A:** it's how we access the `queryClient` instance we initialised in `client/index.js`

**Q:** What does `invalidateQueries` do then?
**A:** It lets us tell React Query that all queries with `'todos'` as a Query Key, to refetch themselves, we do this in the onSuccess part to tell React Query "hey, the todos we currently have stored in state are probably out of date (or "invalid"), let's refetch them to make sure we have the most up-to-date version.

Note: the word "invalidate" is used because server-side state management is much like cache management, we're temporarily storing data that came from somewhere else so we can reference it and use it. And in cache management, there's this idea of [cache invalidation](https://www.varnish-software.com/glossary/what-is-cache-invalidation/).

<details>
<summary>Read more about caching and state management:</summary>

With Redux, the data in the store is a representation of the data in the database, which makes it much like a cache.

Cache invalidation is something we do manually in Redux. In the "eh, just refetch it" example, the reason we refetch after we make a change is that current state that we have in Redux is "invalid" or "outdated". 

There are other cases where we would invalidate the cache, like maybe we do it every 30 seconds to make sure that we see the freshest comments on a blog post.
</details>

**Q:** How does `mutation.mutate` work?
**A:** `mutate` calls the function we provided to the `useMutation` hook (in this case, `postTodo`) and passes it a single argument (in this case, `{ newTodo }`)

### refetch stuff from db

That's handled for us in the last bit! When the `'todos'` query is invalidated, the data is fetched again!

The pattern is much the same for updating or deleting data:

- make a mutation with `useMutation`
- call the `mutation.mutate` and pass any variables the `apiClient` needs in an object `{}`
- invalidate the queries that depend on the data that has changed (if we add a todo, invalidate the todos query)
- all invalidated queries are refetched and the UI is updated

## What are the gaps?

React Query makes a lot of the state management problems we have go away... But there are things left afterwrads. For example, when completing `sweet-as-organics-api` with RQ, I had `cart` and `error` left over as two pieces of Redux state. 

However, `useReducer` can be used to handle cart updates without much prop drilling

And the [Context API](https://beta.reactjs.org/learn/passing-data-deeply-with-context) can be used to display an error

## Random note on DevTools:

- React Query comes with its own devtools that are good learning and debugging tools, I'd say they're comparable to the Redux ones
  - They show when data is being refetched and why
  - They show all the current Query Keys being used and when they update

## Wrap it up

Here's what I think;

- React Query builds very naturally on the learnings of week 5
  - In week 5, students spend time learning how to get data to the client-side from an API
  - Week 6 could streamline this process and make it easier to work with server side state (making changes to the database)
- Teaching React Query would mean teaching about caching and cache invalidation (which isn't necessarily a bad thing, but a thing nonetheless)
- It solves [Gerard's teaching task](https://github.com/dev-academy-programme/teaching-tasks/issues/74), bye bye useEffect for data fetching
- We don't have to micromanage the promise lifecycle for data fetching, we are given error and loading states, we can spend more time teaching good UI/UX practices around these
- Redux filled gaps that React had in state management, but since then, state management in React has gotten pretty good: useState/useReducer and the Context API can fill the gaps
- Redux has a bit of "learning whiplash" and makes week 6 a huge undertaking from a learning perspective
- Redux has a lot of boilerplate code to achieve a similar outcome, I found even Redux Toolkit and Redux Toolkit Query have some complex patterns to achieve this (mainly in the upfront cost of needing to understand actions, action creators, reducers, stores, and thunks before touching queries and mutations)
- Redux is a well-established library in the job market, it's a recognised tool and I see it pop up a lot on job applications, does changing to a tool like React Query affect employability?

Phew! That's episode 2 wrapped. Thanks for reading roh's scribbly memoirs 🥳

